---
title: 'New Paper - How do microbiomes establish in Xenopus tadpoles?'
date: 2024-11-25
permalink: /posts/2024/11/25/fems/
---
<b>The role of family and environment in determining the skin bacterial communities of captive aquatic frogs, <i>Xenopus laevis</i></b>

<b>Abstract:</b>
Skin microbes play an important role in amphibian tissue regeneration. <i>Xenopus</i> spp. (African clawed frogs) are well-established model organisms, and standard husbandry protocols, including use of antibiotics, may affect experimental outcomes by altering bacterial assemblages. It is therefore essential to improve knowledge of <i>Xenopus</i> bacterial community characteristics and inheritance. We undertook bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequencing and source tracking of a captive <i>Xenopus laevis</i> colony, including various life stages and environmental samples across multiple aquarium systems. Tank environments supported the most complex bacterial communities, while egg jelly bacteria were the most diverse of frog life stages; tadpole bacterial communities were relatively simple. <i>Rhizobium</i> (Proteobacteria) and <i>Chryseobacterium</i> (Bacteroidota) were dominant in tadpoles, whereas <i>Chryseobacterium</i>, <i>Vogesella</i> (Proteobacteria), and <i>Acinetobacter</i> (Proteobacteria) were common in females. Tadpoles received approximately two-thirds of their bacteria via vertical transmission, though 23 genera were differentially abundant between females and tadpoles. Female frog skin appears to select for specific taxa, and while tadpoles inherit a proportion of their skin bacteria from females via the egg, they support a distinct and less diverse community. The outcomes of this study suggest the impacts of breaking the bacterial transmission chain with antibiotic treatment should be considered when raising tadpoles for experimental purposes.

Read the entire paper [here](https://academic.oup.com/femsec/article/100/11/fiae131/7774408) (open access)

Citation: Chapman PA, Hudson D, Morgan XC, Beck CW (2024). The role of family and environment in determining the skin bacterial communities of captive aquatic frogs, <i>Xenopus laevis</i>. FEMS Microbiology Ecology, 100(11)fiae131
